---
layout: post
title:  "Closures"
date:   2016-04-18 14:00:57 +0100
categories: Javascript
---

Since I started programming in Javascript I always knew that functions can access their outer scope. It's a pattern you can easily identify when palying a bit with functions in the console. 
This pattern is called closure and there's much more to know about it than the simplistic definition given above.

# The lexical environment # 

To understand what is a closure I first have to introduce the lexical environment.

> A lexical environment defines the association of identifiers to the values of variables and functions based upon the lexical nesting structures of ECMAScript code.

What is cool about a lexical environment is that it consists of two components: 
* the **environment record** where are listed all the bindings of variables/functions to their values
* the **reference** to the outher scope.

Look at the example:

{% highlight ruby %}

	var a = 1;
	
	function foo(){
		var b = 3;
	}

{% endhighlight %}

We have two environments, one is related to the global context and the other one is related to the `foo()` function:

{% highlight ruby %}

// global context environment
globalEnvironment = {
	
	environmentRecord : {

		// here we have built-ins such as object and array
		Object: function,
		Array: function
	    // etc..

		// and we have bindings
		a:1,
		foo: function

	},

	// nothing external to the global scope
	outer: null
};

// environment of the foo function
fooEnvironment = {
	environmentRecord: {
		// built-ins
		Object: function,
		Array: function

		// bindings
		b:3
	},

	// here we reference the global scope as the outer environment
	outer: globalEnvironment
}

{% endhighlight %}

When a function is **created** it is associated to the lexical environment to which it belongs via an hidden property called `[[Scope]]`.

When a function **runs** it creates its own `[[Scope]]` and thus its own lexical environment. Additionally, as we've seen, a reference to the originary lexical environment is created too.

Look at this example.

{% highlight ruby %}

// here we have a global scope as before, with its own environment record
// where the binding is a:'Hellow' and sayHello: function

var a = 'Hellow';

function sayHello(){
	
	// here we have the function scope, also with its own environment record AND with the reference to the outer scope
	// remember, the function scope is created when the function runs
	// we are using the built-in function alert to print on the browser the value of a
	// but where is a? 

	alert (a);
}

{% endhighlight %}

The `a` variable is not found within the function scope. But thanks to the lexical environment refernce the function is able to look for the variable in the outer scope, using it for its own purpose.